---
id: gsoc-ideas-20250101
title: GSoC Ideas
---

**NOTE:** These ideas are subject to change at any time prior to us submitting our GSoC 2025 Organization application. Ideas may be added, removed or updated up to this time.

If we are accepted, there may be additions and minor modifications.

## Introduction

Welcome to our GSoC ideas page! Get familiar with our general philosophy by reading this section. The ideas follow afterwards.

### General Considerations

This is not an exhaustive list of ideas, but they broadly classify the types of features on which we'd like to focus our attentions.

You are open to propose your own solutions.

1. We encourage candidates to think laterally.
1. Take the initiative and consider something hybrid taking thoughts from various ideas posted here or something totally new.

We want ideas that will have a material impact on the project

Remember, the ideas list is just a guide for what we feel could be achieved, and not a strict list of requirements. Think of the overall goal of making a better product. Picking a subset of suggestions and expanding them beyond our expectations shows your initiative.

**NOTE:** If you feel the project ideas will take too much time as stated, then:

1. Add that to your proposal
1. Include what you think a reasonable scope should be.

We need your ideas to be completed on time with 100% test cases with each PR.

1. Brittle code that breaks easily does not help the project
1. Incomplete functionality is not acceptable unless specifically stated.

If there are any dependencies on other project ideas, then state it. Also include additional or alternative things that you would do if the dependencies are not completed in your desired time frame

The project is so much in its infancy that we'll accept any good idea that users will want or will facilitate that they could want. They must significantly advance our goal of having an MVP within the year.

We also welcome any other ideas that we could use. Please review the "Desired Features" section of this website for **even more ideas** and further necessary information.

### Internship Participants

Many of you reading this page are interested in participating in our various internship programs (eg. Google Summer of Code, GitHub Externship, Google Summer of Docs, Outreachy, etc.).

1. Make sure to read the relevant `Introduction` and `Application Guide`/ `Contribution Process` pages first.
   1. [GSoC Introduction](./gsoc-introduction).
   2. [GSoC Application Guide](./gsoc-application-process).
2. Review the [Selection Criteria](../internship-selection-criteria) to ensure you meet all the requirements for a good proposal.
3. Use the [Application Template](../internship-application-template) as a guide to formatting your application. The tips on this page are very important.

Good luck!

### Documentation

We need to reduce the learning curve of contributors and sysadmins alike. Project work needs to be well documented in our code so that tools can eventually automatically add it to our documentation websites.

### Testing

All code submitted must be tested. We are working towards getting to 100% test code coverage on all repositories. This will mean that you will have to write tests for new code you write or modify.

The test percent code coverage requirement will incrementally rise with each pull request. In some cases you may have to write a few extra tests for code you may not have updated. We hope this will be rare.

Write code that will work in the long term. Eliminate brittle code that will easily break.

### Repository Languages and Skills

Here is a list of basic skills that will be required for each repository.

1. **Talawa:** Flutter / Dart, GraphQL
1. **Talawa-API:** Typescript, GraphQL, MongoDB
1. **Talawa-Admin Portal:** TypeScript
1. **SwitchMap-NG:** Python
1. **Pattoo**: Python

There are others, but these are the primary ones that will guide your contributions.

### Impact Definition

We have categorized the various ideas according to the degree of impact they will have to the project. Use these definitions to understand how each idea will affect our overall project goals.

1. **Low-hanging fruit:** These projects require minimal familiarity with the codebase and basic technical knowledge. They are relatively short, with clear goals.
1. **Risky/Exploratory:** These projects push the scope boundaries of our development efforts. They might require expertise in an area not covered by our current development team. They might take advantage of a new technology. There is a reasonable chance that the project might be less successful, but the potential rewards make it worth the attempt.
1. **Fun/Peripheral:** These projects might not be related to the current core development focus, but create new innovations and new perspective for our project.
1. **Core development:** These projects derive from the ongoing work from the core of our development team. The list of features and bugs is never-ending, and help is always welcome.
1. **Infrastructure/Automation:** These projects are the code that our organization uses to get our development work done; for example, projects that improve the automation of releases, regression tests and automated builds. This is a category in which a contributor can be really helpful, doing work that the development team has been putting off while they focus on core development.

### Difficulty

Most of our project ideas require knowledge of two or more programming languages. Meaningful PRs that prove your understanding of the repos will always be beneficial. We have created testing issues specifically for this purpose.

1. **Hard:** Requires dominion of the language used by the repo most affected by the project. A good working knowledge of the languages used by other affected repositories will be needed.
1. **Medium:** A good working knowledge of the languages used by affected repositories will be needed.
1. **Easy:** A beginner's level knowledge of the languages is sufficient.

## Talawa Areas

Talawa is a suite of applications that is aimed at managing the memberships of community based organizations. This concept may be new to you, and we suggest you research non-profit organization and open source software project management software as a starting point. Talawa needs to have a broader reach and your additions to our ideas will make the difference. We have included links to YouTube videos on this page that will be useful in improving your understanding.

Your solution should ideally consider the:

1. ability of typical small community organizations with limited resources to:
   1. get tech support to maintain the application
   2. have tech-savvy users
   3. afford long term costs
   4. need all membership information completely under their control
   5. manage services outside the applications
2. impact of using third party services
3. performance / usability trade-offs
4. potential data residency law requirements

We will not support administrative functions in any of our mobile apps.

### Improved File Uploads and Security

1. **Description:** We need a better solution for handling files uploaded from Talawa clients. GraphQL is unsuitable for file access and, storing files in the code tree with only a `.gitignore` file as protection is risky.
2. **Expected Outcomes:**
   1. Objects must be:
      1. Stored in a location outside the code tree
      2. Accessed using industry best practices and libraries that are unlikely to be deprecated or abandoned.
      3. Deduplicated.
      4. Encrypted whenever and wherever possible.
      5. Stored in the same way independent of their size, type or other characteristics.
      6. Screened for malicious content.
   2. Other
      1. By default, storage must be accessible via the system's locally accessible filesystem as a configurable parameter(s).
      2. The use of cloud storage services is discouraged at this time.
3. **References:** There have been extensive discussions about this which should help in evaluating options.
   1. https://github.com/PalisadoesFoundation/talawa-api/pull/1168
   2. https://github.com/PalisadoesFoundation/talawa-api/issues/952
4. **Repos to update:** Talawa, Talawa-API, Talawa-Admin
5. **Skills Required:** Code stacks related to repos above. See introduction section.
6. **Depends on Project:** N/A
7. **Project Size:** 350 hours (Large)
8. **Possible Mentors:**
   1. TBD
9. **Difficulty:** Medium
10. **Impact Definition:** Core development

## SwitchMap-NG Areas

SwitchMap-NG is a suite of applications that map the topology of information technology networks.

Our v1.0 SwitchMap-NG code is used by a few organizations. There were requests to:

1. include historical data which led to the current version that has a database backend.
1. have pollers in diverse locations with a centralized web UI

This created additional complexity in the configuration and management of the application. It also creates opportunities for improved functionality.

### Enhanced SwitchMap-NG Web Features

1. **Description:** The current web UI/UX needs to be improved to increase the usage of SwitchMap-NG by the wider community.
2. **Expected Outcomes:**
   1. Web UI/UX
      1. The code uses deprecated python packages that prevent upgrading the rest to current versions. The flask-table package is the most notable one
      1. The UI looks dated because it uses the flask-table package for HTML tables. A more modern alternative is needed. This may or may not be written in Python.
      1. The latest version offers many new features. We are eager to add new web based capabilities based on these additions that will increase the usage of SwitchMap-NG by the wider community.
   1. Repository Strategy
      1. We want to migrate from a monorepo to a polyrepo strategy. We feel this will:
         1. Allow optimization of each subsystem's code using the appropriate best practices.
         1. Reduce the learning curve to contribute.
      1. Your plan must include an approach to convert the existing repository to support only the web front end.
   1. Installation
      1. The current version requires the installation of system daemons. A method that uses more modern containerization for simplicity is needed.
      1. Interaction between the equivalent replacements for the daemons must only communicate via existing GraphQL API calls for data.
      1. We need an easy to use installation and configuration script for the web UI.
         1. The structure of the configuration files must be maintained
   1. Documentation
      1. We want to create a GitHub pages based website to:
         1. Provide an up to date user guide for the web application.
         1. Create autogenerated markdown documentation for developers from the code base based on code comments.
            1. This is already done in our Talawa\* repositories.
            1. GitHub actions must be created to ensure that the auto-generated documentation is formatted according to our standards.
      1. The site must be created using Docusaurus and the Docusaurus code must reside in the repository.
      1. The site must be autoupdated whenever the markdown mentioned in this section is changed.
   1. Testing
      1. We want to achieve 100% test code coverage for the repository using GitHub actions
      1. We also want GitHub actions to fail if codecov.io code coverage criteria are not met and coderabbit.io does not approve the PR.
3. **Repos to Update:** SwitchMap-NG
4. **Skills Required:** Proficiency in the code stacks related to the repository. Refer to the introduction section for more details.
5. **Depends on Project:** N/A
6. **Project Size:** 350 hours (Large)
7. **Possible Mentors:**
   1. TBD
8. **Difficulty:** Medium
9. **Impact Definition:** Risky/Exploratory

### Enhanced SwitchMap-NG Scalability

1. **Description:** SwitchMap-NG has multi-site capabilities, but we need more functionality for it to scale from a few to thousands of pollers.
2. **Expected Outcomes:**
   1. Operation
      1. The app isn’t suitable for a distributed deployment with groups of pollers that may not have access to the central API server. There needs to be an intuitive way for:
         1. pollers to send data to an aggregator in their region
         1. each regional aggregator to send data to the central API server
         1. configuring this.
   1. Asynchronous Polling
      1. Replace threaded polling with an asynchronous polling mechanism using Python’s asyncio or aiohttp for better scalability. This would allow polling of larger networks without blocking and improve the overall speed and resource usage. This would facilitate faster data collection, more efficient resource utilization, and the ability to scale to large networks.
   1. Historical Data Storage
      1. Use the current state database to store and analyze historical network data, such as port utilization, device status, and ARP data over time. This would allow users to analyze trends and detect issues that may have developed gradually.
   1. Additional Data Collection
      1. Extend SNMP support by parsing additional MIBs for more detailed device information, such as CPU usage, memory stats, or interface statistics. This would make the inventory system more comprehensive.
   1. Repository Strategy
      1. We want to migrate from a monorepo to a polyrepo strategy. We feel this will:
         1. Allow optimization of each subsystem's code using the appropriate best practices.
         1. Reduce the learning curve to contribute.
      1. Your plan must include approaches to:
         1. Create a separate poller repo
         1. Create a separate API repo while maintaining the existing endpoint functionality.
   1. Installation
      1. The current version requires the installation of system daemons. A method that uses more modern containerization for simplicity is needed.
      1. Interaction between the equivalent replacements for the daemons must only communicate via existing API calls. The RESTful posting of data to the DB API server’s file system should remain to reduce the potential overload unless a suitable alternative can be found.
      1. We need an easy to use installation and configuration script for the web UI.
         1. The structure of the configuration files must be maintained
   1. Documentation
      1. We want to create GitHub pages based websites to:
         1. Provide an up to date user guide for the API and poller applications.
         1. Create autogenerated markdown documentation for developers from the code base based on code comments.
            1. This is already done in our Talawa\* repositories.
            1. GitHub actions must be created to ensure that the auto-generated documentation is formatted according to our standards.
      1. The sites must be created using Docusaurus and the Docusaurus code must reside in the respective repositories.
      1. The sites must be autoupdated whenever the markdown mentioned in this section is changed.
   1. Testing
      1. We want to achieve 100% test code coverage for the repository using GitHub actions
      1. We also want GitHub actions to fail if codecov.io code coverage criteria are not met and coderabbit.io does not approve the PR.
3. **Repos to Update:** SwitchMap-NG
4. **Skills Required:** Proficiency in the code stacks related to the repository. Refer to the introduction section for more details.
5. **Depends on Project:** N/A
6. **Project Size:** 350 hours (Large)
7. **Possible Mentors:**
   1. TBD
8. **Difficulty:** Medium
9. **Impact Definition:** Risky/Exploratory

## Pattoo Areas

Pattoo is a suite of ETL applications that store time series data with various visualization features.

### Enhanced Pattoo Web Features

1. **Description:** We want to make Pattoo more user-friendly and versatile for non-technical users and organizations that need actionable insights quickly.
2. **Expected Outcomes:**
   1. UI/UX
      1. Improve the frontend by adding a powerful, customizable dashboard where users can visualize their data in real-time. Implement features like drag-and-drop widgets, custom graph types, and time-window selection for better insights. Your solution may or may not be written in Python.
   1. Testing
      1. We want to achieve 100% test code coverage for the repository using GitHub actions
      1. We also want GitHub actions to fail if codecov.io code coverage criteria are not met and coderabbit.io does not approve the PR.
3. **Repos to Update:** Pattoo
4. **Skills Required:** Proficiency in the code stacks related to the repository. Refer to the introduction section for more details.
5. **Depends on Project:** N/A
6. **Project Size:** 350 hours (Large)
7. **Possible Mentors:**
   1. TBD
8. **Difficulty:** Medium
9. **Impact Definition:** Risky/Exploratory

## Hybrid Areas

Hybrid ideas add to the existing repos in ways we would not have foreseen. They must:

1. Use existing Palisadoes Foundation repositories
2. Add complementary features to one or more existing Palisadoes Foundation repositories

Hybrid ideas are not for new Palisadoes Foundation repositories.

### Hybrid: Hybrid Innovation

1. **Description:** Do the ideas need something more? What completely new thoughts could be applied to the existing ideas? If you have answers to these questions then this section is for you.
2. **Expected Outcomes:** Your proposal must meet the guidelines below. It must:
   1. Not depend on other participants. There should be minimal impact by other participants disappearing or doing a very bad or very good job.
   1. Add completely new features not previously stated in ideas.
   1. Create features that users will want or facilitate new features that will be the groundwork for features that they would want.
   1. Be suitable for use by most non-profit organization.
      1. We are not interested in membership subscriptions and any related financial management at this time.
   1. Justify 350 hours of work.
3. **Repos to update:** Talawa, Talawa-API, Talawa-Admin
4. **Skills Required:** Code stacks related to repos above. See introduction section.
5. **Depends on Project:** N/A
6. **Project Size:** 350 hours (Large)
7. **Possible Mentors:**
   1. TBD
8. **Difficulty:** Medium
9. **Impact Definition:** Risky/Exploratory
